Ensure presence of:

1 lemon
3 apples (prefer rave; granny smith acceptable - must not be too sweet or mealy)
1.5tsp cinnamon to 2.5tsp cinnamon
1.25 cups white flour
.5 tsp baking powder (non-aluminated)
4 eggs
.25 tsp salt
1 cup sugar
1/4 cup sour cream
2 tsp vanilla
Baking pan
Eggbeater
1L pyrex measuring cup
250mL pyrex measuring cup
Soft butter

Crack eggs into pyrex and leave to sit at room temperature
Coat the baking pan with soft butter
Juice 1 lemon into small pyrex and beat 1.5tsp cinnamon in with a fork
Combine flour and baking powder in a mixing bowl
Add .25tsp salt and 2tsp vanilla into eggs
At this point, if adding cinnamon to the batter, add about 1tsp
Beat eggs
Add 1 cup sugar into eggs while beating
Add 1/4 cup sour cream into eggs while beating
Peel, core, and dice apples (this is easiest if you peel, cut them in eighths, slice out the core, divide into sixteenths, and then dice).  After dicing each apple, put it in a bowl and toss with 1/3 of the lemon juice and cinnamon.
Sift the flour into the egg mix while folding (it's fine to just add the flour in stages and beat with the beaters but it will make it somewhat tougher due to gluten)
Preheat oven to 350F
Coat the bottom of the pan in less than 1/3 of the batter.
Add coated apples in an even layer; layer batter and apples on top of each other.  Ensure the apples on top are coated with at least some batter.
Bake 50 minutes; do not use convection
Allow to cool

Notes:
The goal is to get the cake even and somewhat fluffy, which is very difficult with this degree of moisture.  One does not want the apples to dry out.  The strategy for this involves a few points:
- Make sure there is enough batter coating the bottom to accept the apple moisture, or don't put too many apples on the bottom layer
- Let the eggs get to room temperature before beating them
- Add a small amount of cream of tartar to the eggs, about 1/4 of that needed for meringue
- Bake somewhat more slowly and for longer
- Make a shallower cake

It is possible to beat the flour, eggs, sour cream, sugar, salt, and vanilla all together, though it will worsen the texture of the cake.  It is also possible to omit the sour cream, vanilla, and salt, but it will greatly damage the flavour.  It is also possible to not coat the apples in lemon and elide the cinnamon, though this will make the apples taste more mealy.

To greatly abbreviate the recipe:
- Coat the bottom of the pan in some batter (this is to absorb water from the apples as they cook)
- Mix the remaining batter and apples, being careful not to strip the cinnamon off
- Pour the mix into the pan, level it, and bake

History:
This is a post-Stalin-era Sharlotka; previous versions would have been made with dark bread and had no-bake variants.  Acidifying the apple with lemon is a later innovation.  The earlier recipes called for any sour apple such as Granny Smith.  Earlier recipes would have included some grated citrus rind if available.

The recipe is French in origin, two ways: first, it is descended from Charlotte aux Pommes, a fruit and bread pudding.  The later variants are essentially a Clafoutis, but made with sour cream instead of milk, and vanilla instead of rum.  Clafoutis can be made with nearly any fruit.
